Appendices Introduction
=======================

This section provides a brief introduction to each Appendix, explaining
the background. Each heading is preceded by the number of the Appendix
in square brackets.

**[1]** :ref:`a1-minerva`

This is an introduction to the Minerva ROM replacement which not only
corrects many bugs contained in the original Sinclair ROMs, but
additionally introduces completely new features to SuperBASIC and in
general as well as speeding up the operation of the QL.

It is worth noting that the QDOS operating system had relatively few
bugs, whereas in the early QL days, hackers competed to find as many
bugs in the SuperBASIC interpreter as possible.

**[2]** :ref:`a2-smsqe`

This is an introduction to the SMSQ/E replacement operating system which
is available for several different hardware platforms, from the standard
QL to QPC, a software emulator for PCs.

This is a massive extension to the original QDOS operating system with
several new keywords and fixes of existing bugs.

**[3]** :ref:`a3-emulators`

This gives general information about the range of emulators which are
available to allow QL software to run on other computers.

**[4]** :ref:`a4-thor--computers`

This provides some information on using SuperBASIC on the THOR range of
computers.

**[5]** :ref:`a5-expansion--boards`

This section gives a general introduction to the main expansion boards
currently available for the Sinclair QL. Various older add-on boards are
available second-hand which really only added Toolkit II, extra memory
and possibly disk access to the QL. The boards listed here actually
replace parts of the original QL, increasing speed and adding a host of
other features.

**[6]** :ref:`a6-compatability`

This section provides basic and some expert background information on
software and hardware compatibility across the range of different QL
machines available.

**[7]** :ref:`a7-multiple--basics`

This section provides details of the various QL implementations which
allow you to run several BASIC programs at the same time, as well as
detailing how multiple BASICs should be used.

**[8]** :ref:`a8-error--messages`

This section lists the QDOS error messages on the different ROMs, or at
least those where we could get hold of the text. The main section will
usually refer to the error code, so this appendix allows you to find out
about how this is represented on your ROM as well as giving some general
advice concerning what may have caused the problem.

**[9]** :ref:`a9-character--sets`

This lists the character set and informs you about the different keys
needed to achieve the same character code on the different QDOS
computers. Again, this may be incomplete, but it helps the programmer
recognise foreign keyboard layouts.

**[10]** :ref:`a10-character--sets`

This section explains how you can create and link new fonts into the
QL.

**[11]** :ref:`a11-mathematics`

This section gives some necessary background to the QL mathematics
package to make certain keywords easier to use. Do not worry, it is
understandable (we hope!).

**[12]** :ref:`a12-device--drivers`

This forms an introduction to device drivers in general and also
provides numerous detail about the different drivers and hardware on
different machines.

**[13]** :ref:`a13-extended-pe`

This section provides a short introduction to the Pointer Environment
and explains what it has to offer.

**[14]** :ref:`a14-coercion`

This provides some brief details as to how the QL converts strings to
numbers if necessary.

**[15]** :ref:`a15-mouse--drivers`

This section provides details of the various ways of linking a Mouse to
the various QL implementations.

**[16]** :ref:`a16-ql--display`

This section provides various details concerning how the QL's display is
arranged in memory and how to ensure that programs are able to work on
all the various display resolutions available to the QL.

**[17]** :ref:`a17-networks`

This section details the various options which are available to allow
the QL to connect to other computers over Networks as well as setting
out various details about how networks work and how to ensure greater
reliability over data sent.

**[18]** :ref:`a18-configuring--programs`

This section covers the use of the CONFIG utility to configure a 
program with suitable default settings.

