..  _auto:

AUTO
====

+----------+-------------------------------+
| Syntax   | AUTO [start\_number][,step]   |
+----------+-------------------------------+
|Location  | QL ROM                        |
+----------+-------------------------------+

This command automatically creates line numbers in the command line (#0)
to assist in entering SuperBASIC programs. It would normally only be
entered as a direct command (although you can include it in a program
line, the line numbers will not be generated until the program has
finished its work).

Once entered, you will be presented with the first line start\_number
(default 100) - if this line already exists in the program, then the
existing line will be presented. Otherwise, you will only see the
current line number. Pressing the up and down arrow keys will move you
to the previous line or the next line (respectively) in the program,
although if there is no previous (or next) line, then you will exit the
AUTO mode. However, if you press the Enter key, the next line number
will be generated by adding step (default 10) to the current line
number.

If you wish to escape this sequence, press the Break key <CTRL><SPACE>.

**Example 1**

Generating program lines: AUTO 1000,10

generates lines 1000,1010,1020,1030,... AUTO 10

generates lines 10,20,30,40,.... AUTO ,5

generates lines 100,105,110,115,...

**Example 2**

Adding line numbers to a numberless boot program: AUTO 100,10: MERGE
flp1\_boot

**NOTE 1**

A step value of zero returns 'Bad Parameter' (-15). You can however
achieve this by using EDIT start\_number instead.

**NOTE 2**

Did you realise that AUTO 200,10 is the same as EDIT 200,10 ?

**NOTE 3**

On non-Minerva ROMs AUTO uses the same routine as RENUM to check its
parameters, which means that you can specify a start\_line and an
end\_line, although they do nothing. For example:

AUTO 100 TO 1000;1000,20

would create lines 1000,1020,1040,...

**NOTE 4**

The maximum line number is 32767 - trying to use a higher line number
will cause an overflow error.

**NOTE 5**

If start\_number and step are not integer numbers, they will be rounded
either up or down to the nearest integer (compare INT).

**SMS NOTE**

On current versions of SMS AUTO has been re-coded to be the same as ED,
therefore it will not allow a second parameter, and merely places you in
ED mode with the cursor at the specified start line number.

**CROSS-REFERENCE**

Please refer to :ref:`edit` which is very similar.

:ref:`dline` allows you to delete SuperBASIC lines.

